# Solid Practitioners - 2024-12-19

## Meetng Date
* 2024-12-19 

## Facilitator 
* Jeff Zucker - dubzed@gmail.com
 
## Scribe
* Theo - Thhck

## Participants (please add yourself)
- Marc Haddle Datasolids
- Theo - Thhck - liquid.surf
- uvdsl - Christoph Braun 
- [Michal](https://id.mrkvon.org) ([SolidCouch](https://solidcouch.org))
- Josh Corneo
- Brandon
- Jeff j
- Jeff Zucker
- Rahul
- Kai Glib (Graphmetrix)

## Agenda

* Announcements
    * Call for Scribe
    * Get those Use Cases in!!!!
    * Renaming client-to-client specs

* New Member Check-in (brief intro, current work)  

* ORDL - presentation by Josh Corneo


## 
 
jz: 
 - invite ppl to check Jesse post on the forum and put what you are working, or Solid use cases for the [lws ? https://github.com/w3c/lws-ucs/issues]
 - C2C ( client to client ) : bring to ppl peer to peer, but its onfusing, ppl think it's peer to peer, but it mean how can app agreed on how to store data. let's find another name: 
Rahul : 
 - "application interoperability" is a more understandable name for everybody. 
 - maybe something more neutral than "application"

Christoph Braun:
 - let's name the spec for what they are good for
 - there is something for discovery and another for access

Rahul:
 - To what extend do we want discovery to be on the spec ?
jz:
 - the lws is working on server protocol, I prefer terms en encompasses as much as possible. discovery and access are two different think but both work together. 
 r: 
 - maybe "client interoperability"
 Jesse Wright:
  - the bigger challenge here is not the naming but how the spec will look like, as there is a few implementation emerging. We need to firstly have an understanding on how the spec should look like. And then have converted effort to build those spec. Tim, jackson morgan and myself ask for nlnet grant for this, to build infrastructre for client interoperability as well as some shapes for specific cases. Create a task force on the matter. 
 
 jz:
  - anoyone some news on project they have been working on ?
 
 brandon:
  - I have an issue: can register and create account but webId link don't resolve to anything [ on NSS ]
 
jz:
 - as a community we have decided to move away from NSS to CSS, with pivot, a community fork of CSS. We advice to move to pivot. 
 - NSS is easier to understand than CSS however

[some debugging talk ,  helping brandon..]

mrkvon:
 - I wrote a tutorial on how to set up a CSS instance, but it is very opinionated: https://github.com/mrkvon/css-setup

JW:
 - plz if you are using on user story and use case, post them there: https://github.com/w3c/lws-ucs/issues

 - ODI panel in London end of febuary, we need additionnal person on solid, email me today if you want to be part of the panel.

[starting the presentaation from JC on ODRL]

(recording)

Josh Corneo:
 - I come form the Open Digital Rigth Language , 
 - [... plz refer to the recording] (link coming soon)
