# Solid Practitioners

## Meetng Date
* 2024-11-07

## Facilitator 
* Jeff Zucker - dubzed@gmail.com

## Scribe
* Michal

## Participants (please add yourself)
Damon - damon.outlaw@wedistribute.org
Jeff Zucker
elf Pavlik
Rahul
Marc Haddle
Rui Zhao
[Michal](https://id.mrkvon.org)
Jesse

## Agenda

* Announcements
    * Call for Scribe

* New Member Check-in (brief intro, current work)  

## Check-in

- Rahul: PREP has been finally implemented in NSS, I've been attending ?ITF, a lot of technical stuff, some could be interesting
    - Jeff: Could you sometime give us introduction to PREP, how as a developer you could play with
    - Rahul: I could probably in 2 weeks. For now I can give code snippet to get started today
- Michal:  solid-identity library had bug. It's fixed, and added CI tests. You can also use it with external webId now, for example to have bot that has full access to your pod and do some admin stuff for you.
- elf Pavlik: I met with Sebastien, Lauren, Niko from ActivityPods and NextGraph last Friday. Plans for ActivityPods, NextGraph, they're interested in SAI, exciting.
    - I've been trying TS [Effect](https://effect.website) library. I'm doing RPS ??? . Happy to share my experience if somebody is interested.
- Marc: We're working on use-case within healthcare, polling patient data from multiple platforms to one longitudinal record and give it to patient. This allows patients to much more easily participate in research.
    - Post (snailmail), Fax, electronic data interchange (EDI)
    - We're using Fax as transition protocol, and you can actually send data objects through fax. eFax server up and running, sending PDFs.
    - Source system has to give patient data to patients when requested (in US). It also has to be given in consumable format FHIR (RDF support) or ???
    - This can really scale and clean up health data in US. Patients can have their whole record in their custody.
    - we can have group of people with custody of their data
    - Jeff: Currently no single medical institution in US has full overview of a single patient. Right until several years ago there was healthcare open system for veterans and it worked well. It was privatized and became bad.
- Damon: Working with ActivityPods dev, for specific project built on top of AP. Our focus is ?Memory project: similar to what Mastodon provides, but with custody and ownership over the data. We believe that ActivityPods provide the actual promises that []. Today's focus was data aggregation, ethical ways to aggregate data etc.
    - Jeff: Sebastien is going to come December 5, and hopefully you can also share your work.
    - elf Pavlik: you mentioned data aggregation. Is it just public data, or also data with access control?
    - Damon: Allow-less and Deny-less access. We can allow individuals to connect to relays. APods allow non-public data to be routed to who it's intended for. Issue we have: what's public how do we aggregate that? There is no structured approach to it as of now. APods are meant to be routed to individual, so public data is our focus now.
    - Marc: With APod, are all data remaining in pods? Risk of API spaghetti?
    - Damon: APub has inbox and outbox. In APods, you have user pods, inbox and outbox is within. The classical server houses everything, but user doesn't have ownership. If I'm admin, I can access all user data. APods allow using Solid for intentional access control
    - AT protocol (?app view) that BlueSky does. We make something similar. So it's not about API spaghetti, but how we aggregate and show the public data to users.
    - Marc: Inbox & Outbox are pointers, or actual data?
    - Damon: Actual data. Objects will be directly within user's inbox and outbox.
    - eP: Person puts activity to outbox, and server aggregates it and sends to inboxes, is that correct?
    - Damon: Yes, but it's Mastodon stuff.
    - eP: So data are in outbox and inbox are replicas?
    - Damon: yes, original is in outbox, then it's duplicates. That's a reason why it isn't that efficient. Every time copy is made, data get larger. That's why Mastodon isn't very efficient. We've considered using IPFS service called FileBase, so it doesn't get larger.
    - Damon: Pavlik, you said you met with APods devs, can you share?
    - eP: It was about users having more Pods. In Solid you can have multiple, like CSS and by design.
    - Rahul: can you explain multiple pods on same server? is it same mechanism as in general?
    - eP: in CSS you have one account and multiple pods. So you can claim multiple paths or subdomains.
    - Rahul: functionally it's not different from single webId, right?
    - eP: username and password are credentials for OIDC. You can have 1 webId with multiple pods, many webIds with many pods, but there isn't webId associated with specific pod on CSS. Nowhere in Solid protocol is assumed that 1 user has 1 storage.
    - eP: we also talked about collective pods. in SAI I work with individuals and organizations. This creates an ecosystem, .... In SAI all APIs assume many-to-many relationships. Second part of our conversation was about SAI specifics.
    - Jeff: Could you explain how multiple storages work with single webId?
    - eP: webId profile doesn't have to be in specific storage. In SAI we don't advertise pim:storage. [...]
    - it doesn't matter if webId is in the storage or out.
    - Damon: How are the pods identified?
    - eP: Pods can be in the same server or different servers.
    - Jeff: What are advantages of two storages vs 2 containers in single storage?
    - eP: 1 storage is more convenient, but you may want to have multiple storages with multiple providers.
    - Damon: hubzilla has nomadic identity

## Governance structure of Solid

- Jeff: Governance structure of Solid is changing. Previously we had Solid Team, volunteers, ...
- Now, ODI took over governance and will in some unspecified manner re-constitute Solid Team.
- Tomorrow is [open call with Open Data Institute](https://www.eventbrite.co.uk/e/odi-and-solid-building-a-future-where-data-works-for-everyone-tickets-1062010284349), I hope you join.
- My own interest is supporting Practitioners. I want practitioners to collaborate and give the word out. I hope ODI can support this.
    - Team could do Solid World, Website, and support of Practitioners, hopefully voted by community. I want all these different aspects.
- Marc: What's relation with W3C?
- Jeff: W3C has working and community groups. We (Solid) have community and now also working group. Community group used to be part of Solid Team, but are now independent (since a year).
- Practitioners need voice of our own. Team could have website, practitioners, etc that are outward-facing, and community group could focus on standards... and ?ODI could coordinate.
- Marc: Is there a group that showcases capabilities and explores use-cases? Timing is fortuitous with rise of AI and data awareness.
- Jeff: This is the group! What we don't have is support. A lot is on me, and I'd love to see ODI to support us. I'd like you to come here and brainstorm. Hackathons, bounties, Solid World, ... so we would be the focus for building the strong developer community and getting world to know. ODI will also work on legal, policy stuff. I'm happy with that.
- Rahul: A lot of efforts around use-cases have been spontaneous. What I can see, use-cases there are 2.5 start-up efforts. LDP, Solid working group, Solid symposium, ... that became a completely European thing.
- Rahul: ANNOUNCEMENT: the next Solid Symposium is in Laden?? (outside Amsterdam), 2025, and Jeff and I want to propose session together CRDT, Practitioners, Solid. We would be really interested in your interest, participation, ... To join offline, you have to cover your expenses, travel, accommodation
- Jeff: Rahul and I would like to host panel for you, practitioners, to present your work. Talk to me or Rahul about that.
- Rahul: I'd prefer if speaker can tell us earlier, so we can make session plans. Approach me, Pavlik, Jeff.
---
- Rui Zhao: Developing application ,use-case for application authorization. Using Data Terms of Use... So I've been cleaning-up code and implementing features. But it's not so typical use-case application.
---
- Jeff: Please join the meeting tomorrow https://www.eventbrite.co.uk/e/odi-and-solid-building-a-future-where-data-works-for-everyone-tickets-1062010284349 and hopefully more people can share oru vision
- Working group will be interested in use-cases as informing standards. Another part is showing what societal issues we're solving. I would like to see both use-cases, but not stepping on each other's toes. Not getting divided. I'd like to see more synergy.
- Rahul: The process I want to influence the forming of the team. Organizations can have different opinions, and when there is stress, people go out. We need to institutionalize support, openness, ... and this will have influence on my participation.
- eP: It's good to put emphasis on responsibilities, and who is willing to take them on. Not in terms of positions and powers, but responsibilities. I'd start from there.
- Rahul: People take responsibilities, then go away and these responsibilities don't get transferred. It has happened to Solid. Individuals are going to go off. Institution makes sure you maintain continuity as people come and go. We need proper governance structures.
- Jeff: What would you see as governance structure? There are 2 parts of dysfunctionality in current team: 1. people have different visions, 2. endless discussions, where there is a lot of back-and-forth and nothing happens. We need a direction and structure to get things done.
- eP: I participated in Edge Riders 10 years ago: There was principle who does the work calls the shots. We all have opinions, but who does the work? Balance between how much opinion is prevailing, and how much work is done. Merit in making decisions can be healthy and help things move forward.
- Rahul: I have examples: my experience with unions in Sweden, and military history. We need elected body, and nominated members, ... . This body is not responsible for work. It helps people do the work, or fire people. People with interest in the task can become champions of it.
- Jeff: I agree with idea of meritocracy, otoh that attitude has been detrimental to Solid. People who get paid end up doing more than those who don't. This weights things towards members. We need to pull people in, and we need to make sure people have voice before that. I think administrative team / people who work with autonomy is good. One thing Team succeeded: list of team tasks if you go to https://github.com/solid/team you can find the list. I encourage you to go and look, and if something is missing, add it, and think what the new reconstituted Team has in front of them.
- eP: I'm up for balance. What resources are available for ODI-Solid? I hope there will be more info tomorrow. Is it clear what resources are available?
- Rahul: Not now, but effort to raise the resources. Jesse & Tim & ODI seek funding based on this new structure. It's important that resources are handled transparently. Treausurer is important.
- Jeff: Great points, hope you'll bring them up tomorrow: Resources, Process, ... they need to have in mind what they're raising resources for. Speak about that tomorrow! We should look for what we want.
- eP: If there are no resources atm, it's advantage. It can be healthy to use funds to amplify voluntary useful work. It's common in open-source, start on voluntary basis, and then get paid position. Resources for amplifying useful existing work.
- Jeff: That's more oriented towards people already here. Also resources for starting the work are necessary.
- Rui: Do you know what would be the main goal of tomorrow's ODI meeting? I won't be able to participate.
- Jeff: Now is the time. Meeting is to discuss the same things we discuss today. If you have some specific questions, share them with me and I'll present tomorrow.
- Rahul: Go and have a chat with Jesse & folks, and feed that back to us, since you have personal access.
- Damon: It would be nice to see more adoption in terms of awareness and understanding.
- I do wish to see more embracing of the community with ActivityPods 
- ActivityPods' primary goal is to make it simple for devs to build apps. I'd love to see Solid community at large work with APods folks. There are a lot of overlapping principles, and it makes it significantly easier. It's an important relationship.
- Jeff: 12/05 Sebastied will be here and talk about APods. Let's start dogfooding. Let's get some of our interactions done on APods.
- Jesse: We have call [4:30 GMT tomorrow](https://www.eventbrite.co.uk/e/odi-and-solid-building-a-future-where-data-works-for-everyone-tickets-1062010284349), please do come and I'm happy to answer questions and talk about it here as well.
- Jeff: [.....] scribe offline
- Jesse: I'm actively fund-raising, currently we don't have much. I don't have much more to say than Tim put in Matrix. We want community to be even more involved than previous team. We're researching other governance systems (Linux), ... I'm creating board for collecting governance ideas. (link!)
- eP: https://github.com/solid/team?tab=readme-ov-file#tasks there are the tasks of Solid Team, how is your view on the tasks?
- Jesse:
    - SC.net keeps running, I will be administrating in short-term
    - Matrix
    - ...
    - Solid World is going to be done by Inrupt in December, then ODI
    - meetups [...]
    - diversity outreach - pending funding, Rahul mentioned idea of fellowship program for Solid, get people from UNIs.
    - Social media we have all access except Reddit managed by Melvin
    - Practitioners: 
    - solidproject.org: we need advisory group for website contents, not decided now
- eP: what i'm missing is relation between tasks and who's actually making them. otherwise it's more aspirational than practical. e.g. it's good to have updated list about who's doing activities.
- Jesse: would it fit with Catalog? It has projects, is it supposed to include governance?
- Jeff: Yes, those things belong to the catalog.
- Jeff: In terms of support for Practitioners, I envision ODI help us publicizing, reaching out, inviting speakers. That needs infrastructure support. Then sending synergy out from here. We need a better process for that. Then we need support for projects: hackathons for projects & verticals (e.g. healthcare), and getting out word for it.
- Rahul: If you can, take some of the cataloging responsibilities away from Jeff. I'd like Jeff to do more coding and help with administrative support.
- Jeff: I'm going to continue working on backend, and continue working with eP, we're merging our efforts.
- Jesse: Does it require someone to be in the meetings, or can it be based on minutes?
- Jeff: Yes, minutes, but not just minutes, but also forums, matrix. Handling Solid Forum, and spam there, we've done with Arne. Welcome new people, answer questions, I'll keep 
- Jesse: can you give me admin rights to help with administration?
- Jeff: Justin & Jackson are the admins actually of the forum.
- eP: I hear ODI could do things, but it's not very specific. Is there some staff in ODI, some newsletters? Specifics of who in ODI would do it.
- Jesse: I'm currently fundraising, but currently it's me.
- Rahul: We can need a person doing these things so specialized persons can do specialized stuff.
- Jesse: Grace helped a lot, currently we don't have money to take time of the staff.
- Rahul: See if you can get Asian and South-American staff: there will be someone available around the clock.
- eP, Jesse: Component.js and ESM migration discussion.
- ...
- Jesse: UK have some new bill, I'm advising on that, advocating to them to Solid.
- Jeff: I think it's great ODI is getting involved in Policy part of things
- Jesse: Definitely, also Solid Australia I'm happy they're involved. My hope is ODI can become "UN" of Solid, coordinating body between national chapters.
- Rahul: What about setting-up national chapters?
- Jesse: AU has it covered, willing to help us. ODI will be UK national chapter for now. If you know about US, let me know, I agree, ....
- Jeff: Open Commons & Wilfred Pinfold may be great for that.
- [Brazil, Mexico, US discussion]
- eP: If there is chance to collaborate with NLNet, they could have fund for Solid. Maybe in year or 2 could be funds for teams & solid-specific. There is no specific for Solid now, but Fediverse. We could list all Solid projects and add to catalog, then have Solid-focus fund. NGI-Solid.
- Jesse: Independent of ODI? eP: yes.
- Rahul: I've had issues with NLNet and bad experience - possible discrimination and no body to appeal. For organization like ODI it can be possible to apply for funding at EU level directly, without intermediary. You could try reaching EU commisioner directly. (Danish politician.) Preferably EU funding directly.
- eP: not exclusive.
- Rahul: get NLNet if you can, but get direct funding preferably.
- Jeff: Sources of funding should be international and we should seek out and support people in countries that usually don't get supported.

## Next meeting

- eP: Continue the talk of Rui in 2 weeks
