# Solid Practitioners

## Meeting Date
* 2024-11-21

## Participants (please add yourself)

* [elf Pavlik](https://elf-pavlik.hackers4peace.net)
* Jeff Zucker
* [Rahul Gupta](https://cxres.pages.dev/profile#i)
* Wilfred Pinfold
* Jesse
* Marc Haddle
* Philippe Duchesne
* Frederick Gibson (TrinPod)
* Hadrian Zbarcea
* Damon
* Dan (Semantyk)
* Michal
* Rui Zhao
* Theo - thhck - liquid.surf
* Hadrian Zbarcea

## Scribe
* Michal


## Facilitator 
* [elf Pavlik](https://elf-pavlik.hackers4peace.net)

## Agenda

* Announcements
    * Call for Scribe
    * Future topics?
    * Next meeting is dedicated to ActivityPods presentation

* New Member Check-in (brief intro, current work)

## Round Table

### Dan
* Talked to Mexican government https://www.inegi.org.mx/ they're very interested in Semantic technologies, but also give people access to their data, passports, ...
    * currently talking with Jesse, ODI
    * talking with environmental agency
    * if anybody has worked with gov agencies, or know projects in Mexico, Latin America, I'm very interested
* Rahul: Are you aware of project about carbon emission tracking by university of Gallen? It's a powerful project to show. [TODO add reference]

### Jesse

* Fundraising, roadmap, attended ISWC (international semantic web conference)
* Opportunity for penetration testing on open source servers
    * if anybody has libraries to test, send me a message
* Academic: Data Wallets, Verifiable Credentials (VC), I'm frustrated about VC spec. SPARQL queries on derived data, like prove that you're 18. [...]
* Rahul: Have you spoken to Kaliya Young? She has been involved with VC a lot.

### Rahul

* I, Pavlik and Niko have looked at communicating , blank node diffing
* I'm looking into malleable software.
* We're planning at sessions at Solid Symposium. Please contact me or Jeff about participating, if you're interested. I'm doing another session with Pavlik about CRDTs, encryption, ... for that you can contact Pavlik or me.
* Jesse: blank node diffing, RDF change logs, Pieter Colpaert may have some solution for blank nodes already, I may put you in contact.
* Niko has already contacted Pieter, and I know Aad already, so we're in contact.
* Jeff: I want to emphasize that we're doing session at Solid Symposium in April, we're working details and may be able to accommodate remote speakers. About socially beneficial Solid-based software. Please contact us. Have a look and submit proposals, we'd love to work with you.
* Solid Symposium Session Links:
    #### Solid Practitioners
    https://hackmd.io/tCIMUV5pSgC_MfMJHyw8LA
    #### Colabourative Solid - CRDT/OT, Local First, e2ee
    https://hackmd.io/co7x9CnzSuazNjgoxx9E3A

### Hadrian

### Fred

* We work on Solid every single day
* We're finishing up integration with Oracle, specifically to handle very large Pods - billions of object
* Also finishing up search, documentation on search, conceptual search
* work on versioning, we have a proposal. When you upload a file, we can have versions.
* eP: do you plan to propose something to Solid Community?
* at the moment we don't have resources to document, will get to that.
* eP: Thre is a new work item to work with ERP systems, have a look

### Philippe

* Last week we had Solid community meetup in Ghent, Ruben Verborgh and Peter Colpaert I presented solidbench.dev platform, polishing up use cases: retail, annotation.
* Rahul: Can you tell more about the meeting?
* It's organized by Belgian Solid community group. 1-day meeting, ~3 times a year. Ruben talked about wallet, demos, presentations, trust trains by Peter Colpaert.
* Go to https://solidcommunity.be/ to have overview.

### Marc

* We work with use-case for Solid for healthcare, we're aggregating data from disparate sources to complete longitudinal record, and give that to patient, and store in Pod.
* We're setting up fax server, to send fax protocol to send data.
* https://www.hl7.org/fhir/overview.html - data format we use for medical data
* Patient can look at their inventory on Solid Pod
* Custody: Who has custody of the records? Custody is important, regarding health data in single form and access to them.
* We may be ready to show demo within a week.
* DNS on fax server, setup, configuration...... to handle larger workflows with more storage.

### Rui

* paper revisions, not work related to Solid recently

### Theo

* haven't worked on Solid much since June, looking forward to back
* FedCM & Solid FedCM
* authentication to Solid, how you can use Solid app without Pod, with other SSO, e.g. GitHub, creates pod for you, in adition
* Jeff: You should definitely look in my Solid-Rest library. It's a framework for creating a Pod in client on top on other systems. It doesn't use Solid access control. It lets UNIX or any other system behave like Pod. [link]
* Jesse: There is room for collaboration between Solid Community, Matrix, ActivityPub to try aligning our authentication systems. Do you talk with any of those communities, would you be interested in any of that? Improvind adoption of Solid and other decentralized efforts would improve all communities. We need to work with other communities so Authn is aligned.
* Solid has Solid-OIDC, so you need to add middleware between OIDC provider and .... It's a bit complicated to create interoperability with the others, although doable. FedCM is specification so Browser remembers you identity provider https://github.com/w3c-fedid/idp-registration/ . We advocate for that. I don't think it would improve idp interoperability. [...] We try to talk with folks from Matrix and other indie communities
* Jesse: What are their reactions to FedCM?
* TBH it was hard, I explained in chat rooms why it's beneficial, but it's a bit hard to spark interest. Some people from indie web got interested.
* When we work on FedCM with Chrome(?) it feels like working for free for Google. Doesn't feel like communal effort.
* eP: If you'd like we can have a call about it, I've been joining meeting; and there is lightweight fedcm proposed by Mozilla, Google has fedcm. IndieAuth also implemented indie-auth through FedCM.

## Rui, Question

Question: As I understand, there are current proposals about Client-to-Client interoperability. What is the current general plan for C2C interoperability? How is it going to be done? Specifications? Something related to reasoning?
* eP: It seems we want to use Shapes. Nitpick: it's not C2C, it always requires storing on server as well.
    * if people have ideas how to approach it, all proposals welcome
    * SAI, shape trees? Shape specs? Chat exploration? ...
    * I don't think we converge on 1 way atm.
    * Core specs were handled to WG. CG is going to focus on C2C
* Rui: +1 on nitpick
* Jesse: +1 on effort converging. We made proposal to NLNet with Jackson & Jeff in July, using SHACL. Proposal would be to build specs by adding shapes to shape repository. In long-term npm-type, in short term PRing shapes. Try reusing shapes in domain you've been work.
* Jeff: Michiel de Jong UX/DX group. Angelo, ... have been doing client-to-client spec, ground up. Angelo has made module that does reading and writing with shapes. They're working on it from practical angle. They need to be included in the conversation.
https://github.com/solid-contrib/data-modules
* eP: there is sub-ecosystem of JS applications, and those which work in browser. But Solid apps/clients are not limited to JS & Browser. There is a whole ecosystem not in Browser, should be supported. We should make follow-up.
    * We also need versioning of specs, migrations, ... which will be more complicated than just agreeing on shape today.
* Jesse: There is lot of challenges about versioning, migrations. I have proposals but not good answers atm. On curation: we had proposal national chapters for Solid. There may be options for funding for curation, if chapters and ODI have some control over curation.
* eP: different regions may have different shapes, regions. For curation, we have LOV, schema.org. Many devs seem to prefer schema.org than diving into LOV with all the options... that's why people don't like semantic web. My preference would be going in the direction of schema.org. Devs don't have to think what option is the right one. It's like Deno & Node - Deno makes choice for devs, unlike npm which has many many choices.
* Rui: Some people use shapes: SHEX, SHACL, other people use OWL. [...]
* Jesse: There are tools that take OWL or RDFS and make it into SHACL, there are also tools to convert SHACL and SHEX. I'll drop a link.
* Rahul: Jesse, can you clarify what ODI involvement is looking at? What structure do you envision? That will determine how people will get involved.
* Jesse: This is just my ideas atm. If we want Solid interoperable between governments, nations; then we want to have consistent structure to represent person, family unit, ... . We may want shared ontologies that can be extended. This can be a role for national chapters talk with govs, then federation point to make this political debate. I'm trying to get sense how much involvement ODI could have in shapes, and how you want to be involved, and WDYT.
* Jeff: Deserves separate meeting. I'm in support for central group with that role, ODI could be that. There needs to be a structure for community to be involved. Devil is in the detail. I'm all for ODI leadership with community-based board. Yes, but we need to think how that's done.
* Dan: I'd also be interested in something like was said. I'm interested and asked about UN standards, and how governments can speak the same language. I'm interested in this for Mexico, not just data level, but also governance & political level. I want to understand what definitions UN and countries and international standard organizations already have, to use as basis for the standard work.
* eP: I don't think there are low-hanging fruit here. Govs may be high-hanging fruits. Community can be involved in making specifications for chat, ... ; example SolidCouch and how I don't want to hand my doctor's data to the app. SAI has something like this. Now predicate based. For app interop it's not just important to have interoperable data, but also access to data based on context. [...]
* Fred: We could do it in dedicated session. We'd be very interested.
* eP: let's make a poll.
* Fred: Issues with data silos if you don't do it right. We'd be happy to get involved.
* eP: I'll share scheduling poll in matrix for special topic meeting, tomorrow

Jeff: Thank you elf Pavlik for moderation, see you all!



### 


