# Solid Practitioners

## Meeting Date
* 2024-10-17

## Facilitator 
* Jeff Zucker - dubzed@gmail.com

## Scribe
* Michal

## Participants (please add yourself)

- Jeff Zucker
- Marc Haddle
- Brandon Gill
- Rahul
- Mohammad Bahrain
- elf Pavlik
- Michal
- TimBL
- Wilfred Pinfold
- Mohamed Ragab

## Agenda

* Announcements
    * Call for Scribe
    * Daylight Savings Time Change
    * Future topics?

* New Member Check-in (brief intro, current work)

## What have people been up to

- Rahul: not much, coding theorem?

- Mohammad - Excited to introduce myself to the group. Post doc researcher at university of SouthHampton. Using SolidPods for personal, hospital data, search, federation, learning, over large amount of pods. Architecture, indexing, experiments, LLM, ... within and across the pods.

- Brandon: Product manager at DataSolids, data to masses, be able to share their data and have them at hand. Integrating Solid into our backend. Working on receiving the data from clinicians through faxing. Successfully deployed. Now we start with DTL as data comes in, turn it into RDF format for patients to enjoy their data
- Mark: DataSolids team. Use case - using Solid core to use patient data, applications. Treatment, care, patients much more engaged, doctors can see the entire record. Patient can now be identified, located, engaged, ... in clinical trials. Also brings transparency in currently opaque system. Sea change how patient data are stored and shared.
- Wilf: Open Commons, working with NIST on smart city technology. PASS - people who experience home insecurity can keep their documents safe, when they don't want to put their data on Google etc. Can have data in their Pod.
Our product is in trial stage with multiple municipalities. We'll tune it to the needs of first implementers. [...]
- TimBL: Looking at Profile Pane of SolidOS, resolving strange issue with GitHub actions. Social network [...?]
    - Rahul: all tests are passing for me, not sure why it doesn't work for you
    - TimBL: tests all run and pass, only in PR they fail.
    - Rahul: I copied the whole repo and on my main it's passing, all my tests.
    - Tim: I copied your changes to my branch and it still doesn't pass
    - Rahul: Comment-out all lines
    - Tim: Changed npm and node version, and still. All the tests run, but ??? fails.
    - Rahul: Strange. Let's discuss it later.
- elf Pavlik: Wrapped up the last project for NLNet, and now I'm proposing next one to extend CSS to use SAI data grants in form of VCs to ... authorization, app authorization. On existing infrastructure, ... CSS, SAI + VCs, ACP/VC. If somebody has interest or experience, I'm interested in discussing this.

## Housekeeping

### Meeting times

- Jeff: I went with 2 hour meetings, but that hasn't necessarily worked out. Too long for some people. Have 1 hour meeting.
- Daylight saving time - I want to propose to move meeting 1 hour later: UTC 15:00.
- No objections.
- Next meeting November 7th 15:00 UTC.

### Meeting contents

- Jeff: We have meetings on special topics. Indexing, credentialing. What topics are you interested in for the coming weeks?

Or, focus on one of the projects?

What are your ideas for upcoming meetings?

- elf Pavlik: Things related to authorization, delegation, authorizing application. Many people present work with medical data, personal documents, and I'm interested how people avoid situation of "game" application siphoning private data out of the pod.
- Mohammad: Indexing, search, and what strategies people find most efficient
- Marc: Digital cooperative/commons that gives people platform - what can you do with data in your Solid Pod? ... Digital commons, digital cooperative to combine and anonymize people's data. Because it can be quite powerful. Now that the data will be in the same format, having that commons could help us move things to next level.
- Jeff: One of our purposes is to work on top of each other's work.
- Michal: Social aspects of Solid
- Marc: FAIR data https://www.go-fair.org/fair-principles/
- Tim: ?
- Jeff: https://activitypods.org/
- Marc: meetings of ActivityPods are 1 hour before ours. They work also with Nostr and Mastodon.
- They announced partnership with NextGraph.
- elf Pavlik: Niko has presented NextGraph in last week and CRDT meeting this week. also e2e encryption in NG. We'll have meeting about it next week. How NG is doing CRDTs and encryption.
- eP: Next weeks meeting will be with Australian community, relevant for health care data. https://solidcommunity.au/
- Jeff: Solid catalog. I'd like to get back to that. I see catalog as very integral to what we're doing here. Thanks to this we can know what's going on in Solid world. I'd like your help to figure out what you want the world to know. Vocabularies, predicates, ontologies for this purpose. What we want the world to see.

- Mohammad - My project is efficient search over personal repository. Access control. Health data. We're just starting with our experiments. I'll share links with documents.
    - Jeff: ESPRESSO is doing exciting work with search & indexing.

- Mohamed Ragab: ESPRESSO

### Solid Identity library presentation [Michal]

- Presentation: https://hackmd.io/@mrkvon/BJWABuAyJe
- Libraries: https://www.npmjs.com/package/@soid/core, https://www.npmjs.com/package/@soid/koa
- Source: https://github.com/solidcouch/solid-identity
- Discussion [uncaught]


### Jeff: Exciting news:

- TimBL: Solid was running with git and volunteers, but needed some more structure. We found an organization that is going to ???. https://theodi.org/ ODI
- As of today, Open Institute is helping organize the whole Solid thing. Hopefully this will be a big change, incrementally. Jesse Wright has worked for Inrupt, for IMAC, Phd at Oxford University, is going to be the contact pod, will be coordinating the Solid team. Is doing society work as well as tech. Is in charge of Solid team, working for ODI.
- Jeff: If we can get some hackathons going, bounties, workshops, that will be great news.
- TimBL: conferences, ... meetings in physical world
- TimBL: Continuous thanks to everybody involved!

### Meeting continues

- elf Pavlik: I'd like to follow-up on Michal's presentation: CSS does something similar to Solid Identity with webhook notifications. Notification server is using OIDC, creates webId for the webhook notifications.
- How do I authorize a bot on my behalf, when you share data with me? SAI - you can delegate access on your behalf. In SAI there will also be the delegation chain, so it will be clear who ...
- In bigger context
- It's more elegant to have clear delegation chains. Starting with CSS, but with ACP/VC (WAC?) everyone could implement the same approach.
- Rahul: What are you using for there delegation chains?
- eP: SAI defines data grants. Data grants and delegated data grants. It currently works with 1 depth, but can be extended.
- eP: Can we put Practitioners to Solid-CG calendar?
- Jeff: yes


## Catalog

- Jeff: Catalog
- Github repo
- Solid should eat its own dogfood.
- 600 resources gathered by hand, general idea is to list all general parts of Solid
- demo of Catalog
- I want to have overview of projects and see we're doing the same thing. Increase collaboration
- Keywords by which we can search projects.
- Your help needed: what information would you need to express information about your information? The stable information.
- Rahul: Can you give us timeline for a shape that we could use to express information about the project on our homepage?
- Jeff: this will come in stages: 1. catalog, then only identifier, and it will link to a resource provided by you. For this, shape is essential.
- SHACL shape in the repo ([link](https://github.com/solid-contrib/catalog/blob/main/catalog-shape.ttl))
- I'm considering moving it to SKOS.
- Timeline: minimum of ? month, ? fine tuning the shape before making general call.
- elf Pavlik has something called Solid Efforts, there is a lot of symbiosis https://elf-pavlik.github.io/solid-efforts/#/
- his focuses on what has been done and how it relates internally. Mine is resources: what we can use...

