# Solid Practitioners

## Meetng Date
* 2024-12-05

## Facilitator 
* Jeff Zucker - dubzed@gmail.com

## Scribe
* Jesse Wright

## Participants (please add yourself)
* Zach G
* [Pierre-Antoine Champin](https://champin.net/#pa)
* Jesse Wright
* [Michal](https://id.mrkvon.org) ([SolidCouch](https://github.com/solidcouch))
* [Rahul Gupta](https://cxres.pages.dev/profile#i)
* Damon
* Alain Bourgeois
* Nicolas Chauvat
* [Frederick Gibson ](https://graphmetrix.com/trinpod-server)
* [Sylvain Roquebert](https://github.com/SlyRock) ([ActivityPods](https://activitypods.org/))
* Theo - [Thhck](https://github.com/thhck) -  [Liquid.surf](https://liquid.surf)
* [Marc Haddle, Datasolids, LLC](marc.haddle@datasolids.com) 
* Niko niko@nextgraph.org
* [Erich Bremer](https://bmi.stonybrookmedicine.edu)
* [Wilfred Pinfold](https://opencommons.org)  - wilfred.pinfold@opencommons.org
* Francois Branciard (francoisbranciard@protonmail.com)

## Agenda

* Announcements
    * Call for Scribe
    * WG needs use cases
    * Verticals coming in 2025 - Mobility, Health Care
    * Call for video recording
         * any objections
         * if not, can someone volunteer, Jeff is travling
  
## Main Topic: ActivityPods presentation by Sébastien Rosset 

The slides from Sébastien's presentation are here - https://docs.activitypods.org/presentations/2024-12-05-solid-practitioners.pdf
A video recording of today's session is available at https://vimeo.com/1037478498.

JZ: Welcome, we meet 2x per month. Our work is putting Solid in practise, and coordinating different efforts. We also get practical experience of app building to feed back into the Solid specifications. Today PaC will be giving info about LWS use-case collection.
PaC: Mainly want to raise awareness that LWS is collecting use-cases. Can see all WG activity at https://www.w3.org/groups/wg/lws/, and all use-cases are being colleected at https://github.com/w3c/lws-ucs/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3Ausecase. We want practitioners opinions on what the use cases should be. By start of 2025 we will have a curated list of prioritised use-cases. To make the best possible spec, we will want to have the broadest collection possible.
JW: If you have use-case ideas, but lack resources to write it up, let me know directly (jesse.wright@theodi.org), or put a message in the practitioners channel and ODI can find someone to help you.
JZ: We are looking to become more vertical focussed as we go ahead in the future. We wan to invite not just builders of Solid but also users - so that we can work out how it needs to be built for the people that use it. We are first focussed on mobility and healthcare, so if you know someone interested in those topics as a user or developer bring them into the calls. Please propose verticals you want to see in the future.
JZ: Excited to have ActivityPods presenting today. Vincent T. has also set up a Mastodon Channel on which to talk about Solid.
SR: I am interested in developing social tools for the Web. Developed ActivityPub (AP) server in 2018, then SemApps, now ActivityPods. SemApps is a toolbox for linked data applications using Jena + NodeJS + React.
...: Idea for ActivityPods came 4 years ago. Basic idea is that Pod users also have ActivityPub inbox. Took 3months to adapt SemApps to Pod architecture. Developed "Welcome to my place" app w. 600 users.
...: Created another mutual aid application; classified ad. application w. ads private by default but can then share ads with contacts from the "Welcome to my place" application. People didn't realise they were using Pods so created a front-end for Pod management. Can see contacts, installed applications, and data on one's Pod. You can open events with the default application for the event. Settings can be used to set a contact link to send a contact to someone else.
...: Laurin made a v2 using SAI spec to allow access grants. When a user wants to use a new application they need to accept the access needs of the application. This allows us to have a backend that makes it possiible to listen to what is happening on the Pod. This is useful in "Welcome to home application".
...: With v2 also release MastoPod, can connect to anyone on Mastodon. We got money from NLNet (who funded v2) to improve the application - which is still in alpha. 
...: AP advantages include inboxes/outboxes, SAI support, SPARQL endpoint, can listen to events. Disadvantages: No Solid-OIDC support, support for RDF documents, weak turtle support (only JSON-LD is currently supported).

...: What's next: Groupe storage
 -  COD: collective online datastore, basicaly a Pod managed by a group
...: What's next: ActivityPod 3.0: full solid spec compatibility \o/ , LDO integration, independant frontend, use nextgraph instead of Jena Fuseki to manage triple. 

Niko ( next graph ): 
 - nextgraph: a triple, quad store with local store and e2ee. features. Looking to make nextgraph and APod compatible
 - would like to share an idea: decouple the protocole of exchange spec( using HTTP for now ) and interopability spec. We should decouple those -> allow to use something else than HTTP and allow local first feature. 
API in solid have different way to be called: http, e2ee, crdt, rpc...
Then CSS or inrupt could implement an HTTP engine over the protocol exchange. I woudl submit an issue for the use cases

Here is the slide Niko used [DECOUPLING between EXCHANGE PROTOCOL(s) and INTEROP specs](https://file.nextgraph.org/download/d5f2174d8f2a64a1560c8e0a3dc47771)

Community Group on CRDTs in RDF, mentioned by Niko: https://www.w3.org/community/crdt4rdf/

Hadrian Z: Another way of saying it is that the protocol should have 2 parts, a data protocol and a pluggable transport protocol 

Nicolas Chauvat says:@Hadrian said like that, it reminds me of 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OSI_model
 

Sebastien: [a few words got lost..] 
 - linked data are limited, because anyone can post to an ibox, and anything can listen to an inbox, which is great for comments for eg. but not as complete as APub, because APub has an outbox, from which the server post the the receiver inbox w/ http signatures, really help for 2 ways communications. Activity Steams also has a good base vocabulary that are in RDF so extenssible. It also has lots of existing users from the fedivers. 
 - Interest in creating a CSS APod extenssion  - please come and join us ! ( matrix, website, github issue etc...)

# Questions

TimBL : [...]
Seb: [...]

Pierre-Antoine Champin: +1 for APod. On APod and CSS: can we use APod on top of a  pod provider

Seb: in APod some things are hard to handle, like collection ( list follwer, inbox , outbox) and make it hard to just an APod agent on top of a Pod Provider.

Niko: would be easier to do if stream and pub sub abstract to the spec level. We need a level of abstraction in the spec. 

Marc Haddle: [possible to keep registration through different services ?] 

Niko: [possible but not secure ? ]

Lots of ppl would like to see APod on top of a Solid Server, the discussion will follow on a  forum post. 

Josh Cornejo: How do you manage authr ? 

Seb: WE use SAI, and WAC but switch to ACP, because work better for 

Niko: APod use OIDC for now but will go for Solid-OIDC for v. 3.0

JC: the question was more about authorisation , I work with w3c [ODRL spec](https://www.w3.org/community/odrl/) . 

Mrkvon: Do you plan to work on spec ? ( since APod not spec compatible )

Seb: no time, but maybe in the future. 

Mrkvon: have have you publish on the spec ? 

Seb: yes, there is a page on the APod website about the spec compliance with solid and activity pub. Solid spec is much harder than APub https://activitypods.org/specs/activitypub

Timbl: in the defence of "solid spec is complicated", yes its complicated but the benfice is huge: because you can make any app that will be compatible with all the other of the same domain. 

Seb: true, but in our case we already had a stack, and it was hard to adapt to solid spec, its probably easier if one start from scratch

JZ: How can ppl hack w/ APod ? 

Sab: join our [matrix](https://matrix.to/#/%23activitypods:matrix.org), check the doc on the website, drop to our bi-monthly meeting ( at 3pm CET )
