# Solid Practitioners

## Meeting Date
* 2025-04-03

## Details
* call https://meet.jit.si/solid-practitioners
* chat https://matrix.to/#/#solid-practitioners:matrix.org
* repo https://github.com/solid-contrib/practitioners
* recordings https://spectra.video/c/solid_practitioners/videos

## Facilitator 
* Jeff Zucker - dubzed@gmail.com

## Scribe
* Michal

## Participants (please add yourself)

* Marc Haddle - marc.haddle@datasolids.com
* Stephen Taylor - staylorx@gmail.com
* Frederick Gibson - frederick@graphmetrix.com
* [Michal](https://id.mrkvon.org)
* [Rahul Gupta](https://cxres.pages.dev/profile#i)
* Rui Zhao - https://me.ryey.icu
* [Ted Thibodeau](https://github.com/TallTed) (he/him) <https://mastodon.social/@TallTed> (OpenLinkSw.com)
* Jesse Wright
* Jeff J.

## Agenda

* Announcements
    * Call for Scribe

Meeting is recorded in addition to scribing. The recording will be removed once the minutes are completed.

## New Member Check-in (brief intro, current work)

### Stephen Taylor

Colorado, US, originally electrical engineering, then IT for a long time. I've been watching Solid spec for a while. I do Kubernetes, dev-ops, Dart, Flutter, ton of experience with RDF, Semantic web. With the new ODI structure, I'm figuring out where everything is with the new structure.

* Jeff: If you have any topics, our meetings are open, put them in.

## Governance

* Jeff:
Today's meeting will be a bit different. We'll be looking at the structure. We've been meeting informally and I've been facilitating. But we don't have voting, charter, etc. Now that there is ODI structure, our role as Practitioners was recognized as important. Practitioners will be a core body within the community. We have a role to play in long term direction of Solid. We have practical experience, and I think it's vital we have role in future of Solid. This means we need to start charter and bring representative. Elect chair(s).

## Round table

* Fred: I'm CEO of GraphMetrix. Jesse encouraged us to join W3C so we can be at LWS WG. We were added on April 1 (no joke :) ). This is the first time we've formally been in W3C. There are also Smart Cities groups. We are interested in bringing search API into the spec.
* Jeff: Wilfred Pinfold is heavily involved in Smart Cities, and also joins this meeting often. I hope you can coordinate.
* Fred: Yes, we've talked. Great point.
* Jeff: Congrats!
* Mark Haddle: DataSolids. We use Solid in HealthCare and sciences. First step is tackling fragmented health data, bringing them from scattered places to the patient. Sharing and controlling the data will give the user (patient) actual control of their health data. The migration of the data from source systems to the pod as mandated by current US regulations will clean up the state of patient data. Health data is messy and formatting it helps in further processing. Solid Pods are good for custody of your data. Solid is the only framework that allows that and considers it. We have a stable demo ready. We'll be showcasing that at the next talk. We are security engineers, and we build security in, we do not "bolt it on" afterwards.
* Rahul: You might be interested in HTTP query method which is coming to "last call" and might be in spec next week. It'll be relevant for search.
  ... Please nominate yourselves for chair position. I'll probably put my hat in if nobody else does.
  ... We also prepare a session for Solid symposium.
* Fred: Is that search?
* Rahul: It's "http query method", and you can find it through search or on GitHub.
* Jesse: First major thing is the core AC positions are public, and you can apply for AC, or if you know people in government or industry to steer Solid Project on advisory level, please let them know. The link is in the ODI channel, I'll also put it to Practitioners Matrix channel. I'm working on fundraising(?) for ODI. I'd love more time for apps, but not enough time for that.
* Rui: I'm postdoc in Oxford University, the same group as Jesse. I work on data privacy and control. One is data usage and control which we call data terms of use; the other is privacy preserving computation. In free time, I do Solid development.
* Jeff: And you're also in the Operations Advisory Committee, contgratulations
* Jeff J.: I'm with DataSolids, and it excites me to give people more privacy and control over their data. We have demo; and we'll be moving to W3C, which is an adventure. Mark covered the rest of the updates.

## ODI Governance

* Jeff: There is a lot that we need to do in short time. We need the representative to Advisory Committee. WG and CG are appointing representatives, and we'll have one. I self-nominated, and if anybody else wants, step up. will be voting.

  ... We'll need a charter to have clarity who can vote. We should also vote for a chair. I'm self-nominating for it, but I'd appreciate co-chairs, people who can help with managing meetings, and also bring speakers, which takes quite a lot of time. This would also bring more diversity, since I can't do everything.
  ... You can nominate yourselves in issue 16: https://github.com/solid-contrib/practitioners/issues/16
  ... As Jesse mentioned, ODI opened a call for AC in addition to our position. There are several roles that can be interesting, implementers, commercial, ... so please nominate for Practitioners or where you feel you're best suited.
  ... Call for self-nomination for Advisory Committee: https://theodi.org/news-and-events/news/solid-advisory-committee/
  ... We need to discuss what we want to bring to the Advisory Committee.
  ... Hackathons, bounties, necessary software, search, indexing, sign-on.
  ... Our role will be continually important. Today we could discuss what we want to bring there.
  ... Questions?
* Rahul: I'd encourage the comunity to look at the point in the call for co-chairs. And if you have any edits to make, please suggest them in parallel to nominate yourselvs.
  ... I want to make suggestion to limit 1 representative per organization. Not multiple per organization. I'll open that as issue and continue the discussion there.
* Jeff: Because of time pressure, we come up with the rules as we implement them. This should be part of charter establishment discussion. Community Group has similar rule. The whole process is open, and nothing is written in stone. So if anybody has idea about process, please bring them up. Other thoughts?
* Jeff: Ok, let's talk about charter: https://www.w3.org/community/solid/charter/
  [...], voting rights, chairs, ...
  ... I'll take the existing CG charter and modifying it to the needs of our group. On our next meeting we could vote on it. Please familiarize yourself with that document, and in what ways we might want to be different and other suggestions.
  ... In general, the rule about single member per institution welcome. This wouldn't involve informal groupings of developers. Not sure we want the same limits on them.
* Rahul: I would say we should have exception on students. They're typically not salaried. On license, we might come with something else. The W3C license is very peculiar, we might want to encourage something open-source...
* Jeff: I appreciate you taking look. I'd agree. OTOH Solid Community Group's purpose is to come with technical reports. I'm not sure we'll be producing documents, but we may. I'd be in favor of as lenient an Open Source license as we can.
* Rahul: We have a reporting requirement from ODI; and Jesse, this might be too much since we have bi-weekly meeting. It's about requirement to send monthly 
* Jesse: It can be a short message, 2 sentences, so I don't want heavy process, but it would be a good cadence.
* Rahul: I believe minutes will be public anyways.
* Jesse: 1 month is probabaly too fast for practitioners, but I'd like a report what you want us to be aware of.
* Jeff: Can I suggest this would be quarterly, since the AC will be only meeting quarterly?
* Jesse: Should be fine. Anything you want earlier, you can let me or others know.
* Jeff: We need to discuss what to bring to AC. If it's every month, we'd have to do on every meeting.
* Rahul: This is 1.1.3 in your terms of reference.
* Jeff: Other thoughts on Charter? Rahul brought up licensing; does anybody has opinion how reports should be licensed? Rahul, if you could make a suggestion, I'd appreciate that.

### Voting

* Jeff: Votes in meeting should only be provisional. And there should be way for other people, who couldn't join. Online polls, emails, any suggestions?
... speaking of emails: Please go to hackmd and add yourselves into participants. It's going to be one of our ways to find out who is eligible for voting. Participation in X-number of meetings. Please add yourselves to the meetings regularly.
...how do we determine who is eligible to vote?
* Rahul: Anybody who's come to meetings after the point on. We'll have a requirement of minimum of 3 meetings in 2 years period.
* Jeff: that sounds good to me. We also have 2-year cycle.
* Rahul: If somebody drops out and more than year is left, we'd have another election. We'll also have staggered cycles so we'll always have somebody to conduct the elections.
* Jeff: Other thoughts?... I could really use some help in next 2 weeks. At the very least to elect the representative to Advisory Committee. We need to do it by our next meeting, April 17. Any suggestions how to make the meeting?
* Rahul: I'll be helping, but if we both are candidates, it's a conflict of intnerest. Jesse, could you help us?
* Jesse: Potentially. With the OAC we had exact number of candidates, so we didn't need .
* Rahul: If nobody puts their hand up, I will, and we may have more people. Then we can't run the election since we are the candidates.
* Jeff: If we don't have enough candidates, what do we need to do to make it official? Do we need to vote on the people, or do they go in by default?
* Jesse: I'd be inclined to default, but it's completely up to you.
* Jeff: If we only have few people, do you have objections to defaulting to...
* Rahul: I would also suggest that if you feel strongly, you can always lodge an objection to a candidate. But it has to happen in nomination period.
* Jeff: I should add it to the invitation. What would be an appropriate way to do it?
* Rahul: I'd say by email.
* Jesse: Who will be the judge?
* Rahul: Either person who's running the election, or ombuds?
* Jesse: I'd see the objection as reason to have confidence vote. And if there are enough candidates, then standard voting mechanism.
* Jeff: We as a body will decide whether it's a reasonable objection. I think Jesse put it right. If we have more than minimum...
* Rahul: +1
* Jeff: 17 will be the day of actual vote. Nominations will close on 10th.
* Jesse: If there is default, 48 hours for objections. If no objections, we'll default.
* Rahul: 48 hours might be too short. This objection only matters if there are not enough candidates. And we could use part of the voting period for that.
* Jeff: So if we have the minimum number, the voting period would be the time to object. For future electionsn we'll put a timetable in, for now it's ok, do I read the room right?
* Jeff J: Is there another charter we can follow?
* Jeff Z: The CG charter link in the first point. The logical thing would be to first do charter, then vote. Unfortunately time is short, and we have to for this election . Going forward we'd have a separate meeting to vote for the charter.
* Rahul: You'll also have opportunity to PR changes to the changes to GitHub. We want the people who attend meetings to be able to comment on charter, but also for people who might not be able to.
* Jeff: Nominations will close next wednesday, and voting or objections period will be then and on 17 we'll finalize the voting, then we'll start focusing on the charter.
* Jeff: we didn't talk about what we want to bring to AC, but we can discuss it next time.



    * https://theodi.org/news-and-events/news/solid-advisory-committee/
    * https://www.w3.org/community/solid/charter/


    * Practitioners Representative to Advisory Committee (AC) 
    * Practitioners Charter
    * Practitioners Co-Chairs
    * Other AC positions
    * What Practitioners wants to bring to the AC


